Introduction 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) is a regional intergovernmental 
organization that includes eleven countries from Southeast Asia. It was established in 1967 in 
the height of the Cold War period, and it used to be a quite small political bloc, which 
consisted of just five countries, however, in terms of its influence on the developing world, it 
currently is one of the most influential regional blocs with more than 700 million population, 
the GDP exceeding $4 trillion and thus ranking the fifth economy of the world. In this report, 
ASEAN is analyzed from five different angles: the context of its creation and its mission 
statement; ASEAN institutions; ASEAN policy on economic integration, which was 
elaborated in the course of more than half a century of ASEAN's existence; ASEAN's agenda 
up to 2045; and, finally, the limitations of ASEAN structure that prevent it from achieving its 
goals. The main idea of the report is that ASEAN should be considered as a union and is very 
similar to the European organizations in many aspects, but with the exception that it is not a 
supranational organization and, hence, is governed by the principle of consensus among its 
members. 
What ASEAN Is: Nature and Membership 
The goal of ASEAN is to ensure political stability, economic cooperation, and social-cultural 
integration among the countries of Southeast Asia. Three distinctive aspects can be pointed 
out to characterize the nature of ASEAN as an institution. First of all, it is an 
intergovernmental institution rather than a supranational one, which means that, in contrast to 
the European Union, there is no parliament in ASEAN with the right to make legislation, no 
common currency, no central bank, and no court that could bind the member states against 
their will with the only source of authority being the national governments. Second, it acts on 
the basis of consensus, which implies that decisions can be made only with the consent of all 
member states, and each individual state has a chance to veto any collective actions. Third, it 
adheres to the principle of non-interference in the domestic affairs of its member states, and it 

is regarded as something almost sacrosanct in ASEAN. The number of members now stands 
at eleven, from just five when ASEAN was founded in 1967. Indonesia, Malaysia, the 
Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand were the founding nations who subscribed to the 
ASEAN charter. Brunei joined ASEAN on 7 January 1984, while Viet Nam joined on 28 July 
1995. Lao PDR and Myanmar joined on 23 July 1997, and Cambodia joined on 30 April 
1999. Timor-Leste became the eleventh member of the group on 26 October 2025 at the 47th 
ASEAN summit in Kuala Lumpur. It is also the first addition to the group in twenty-six years 
since its establishment; Timor-Leste applied for membership in 2011 and had been accorded 
observer status all along. Such numbers will put into perspective the significance of the 
group. The population of ASEAN, numbering about 700 million people, is bigger than that of 
the European Union, which is about 450 million, and twice as much as that of the USA. Its 
total GDP of more than $4 trillion makes it the fifth-largest economy in the world, after the 
US, China, Japan, and Germany. Around a third of its working age population is younger than 
twenty-five, endowing the bloc with a sizable demographic dividend, and more than 60 per 
cent of its exports consist of goods that participate in global value chains, while China is its 
main trading partner. It is crucial that this diversity within ASEAN encompasses both 
Singapore, one of the high-income financial centers of the world, and Timor-Leste, among 
the poorest countries in Asia.  
Origins and institutional mandate 
ASEAN came into being on 8 August 1967 in Bangkok with the signing of the ASEAN 
Declaration, also known as the Bangkok Declaration. The declaration itself was very short 
and was a non-binding instrument of an intention rather than a treaty. The circumstances 
surrounding its conclusion say much more than the text of the declaration itself. There were 
three factors pushing the five states into the creation of the organisation. Firstly, there was an 
escalation of the Vietnam War, along with numerous insurgencies within the region, so the 
founding countries, which were mostly non-communist countries, wanted to create a kind of 
collective shield from any spreading of the communism without officially creating a military 
bloc. Secondly, the region itself was rather unstable, as the Konfrontasi in Indonesia against 
Malaysia had just come to an end, while the Philippines still had territorial claims to the 

region of Sabah, thus the formation of ASEAN to a large extent helped to avoid conflicts 
between members of the bloc. Thirdly, all the five countries were post-colonial states, newly 
independent and extremely sensitive to foreign interference. 
Objectives which remain part of the mandate include: 
- enhancing economic growth, social progress and cultural development in the region; 
- ensuring peace and stability in the region by upholding justice and the rule of law; 
- offering mutual assistance in economic, social, cultural, technical, scientific and 
administrative fields; 
- continuing cooperation with other international and regional organizations; and 
-maintaining ASEAN Centrality which implies ASEAN’s centrality in the regional order, not 
subordination to other powerful countries. The history of the organization could be charted 
through its series of landmarks. The Treaty of Amity and Cooperation was signed during 
the first ASEAN Summit in Bali in 1976, along with the creation of Jakarta Secretariat. 
ASEAN Free Trade Area was set up in 1992 as the sign of the beginning of economic 
integration, while the ASEAN Regional Forum, set up in 1994, was the first multi-state 
security forum in the region. The Asian Financial Crisis of 1997 led to the creation of 
ASEAN Vision 2020 and the ASEAN Plus Three framework together with China, Japan 
and South Korea. The first East Asia Summit took place in 2005, the ASEAN Charter came 
into effect in 2008, and the ASEAN Community was formed in 2015. RCEP was signed in 
2020, and in 2025 the organization agreed on ASEAN Community Vision 2045 and 
welcomed Timor-Leste. 
How ASEAN works : Institutional structure 
In 2008, the ASEAN Charter institutionalized the framework which was working on 
convention earlier. The ASEAN Summit, which is comprised of Heads of State or 
Government of all member states, is the highest policy-making forum; it convenes twice a 
year and announces all important commitments of the organization. Under the summit is the 
ASEAN Coordinating Council, consisting of Foreign Ministers; it convenes at least twice a 
year for the preparation of summits and monitoring of agreements. There are three 
Community Councils, each linked to one of the three pillars of the ASEAN Community to 

guarantee the proper implementation of decisions taken during the summits in their specific 
fields. Further down the hierarchy, there are specialized sectoral ministerial and senior 
official bodies dealing with specific areas such as trade, finance, energy, health, education, 
transportation and the environment. An example would be the ASEAN Senior Economic 
Officials Meeting (SEOM) which carries out the technical negotiations necessary for 
economic agreements. The ASEAN Secretariat in Jakarta, led by a Secretary-General 
appointed for five years, is in charge of administration, implementation and coordination 
throughout the organization. The ASEAN Secretariat is a small body, less funded than the 
European Commission, precisely because its members do not wish to have an independent 
central power. The chairmanship rotates each year in alphabetical order. The chair organizes 
the summits, establishes the theme for the year, and acts as an external face of ASEAN, 
which gives all the members a chance to influence the agenda. The price paid for this system 
is that priorities change once a year. The Community, on its part, is built on the basis of three 
pillars, each having its own council and strategic plan. The Political-Security Community is 
concerned with peace and stability in the region, confidence building, maritime security, 
counter-terrorism, prevention of conflicts and dispute settlement through dialogue, with 
the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation and ASEAN Regional Forum as its main tools. The 
Economic Community, the most advanced among the three communities, aims at the 
development of a single market and production base with free movement of goods, services, 
investments, capital, and skilled labor, besides reduction of tariffs and economic 
development. The Socio-Cultural Community seeks human development, social welfare and 
protection, sustainable environment, disaster management, and building of an ASEAN 
identity. There is a fourth strategic area, called Connectivity, that is parallel to the above three 
communities. 
Economic Integration: Major Plans and Initiatives 
The economic achievements by ASEAN have been made possible through the development 
of various frameworks and agreements which have become increasingly ambitious. ASEAN 
Free Trade Area, established in 1992, was the first concrete economic achievement of the 
organization. Via the Common Effective Preferential Tariff agreement, members phased out 

all intra-regional tariffs on goods being traded, and the intra-regional tariffs have since 
become almost zero in almost all categories of products traded. This is clearly the only 
example where the organization had set a clear target and achieved it.ASEAN Economic 
Community, launched in 2015, however, sought much more ambitious: single market and 
production base allowing for the free flow of goods, services, investments, capital, and 
professional labor. While considerable progress was made, it remained highly uneven. 
While the liberalization of goods trade, based on previous experience in AFTA, was achieved, 
the liberalization of services, labor mobility, and reduction of non-tariff barriers failed to live 
up to the expectations set by the goals initially set. This lesson in integration is clear: while 
the elimination of a tariff barrier posed no problems for ASEAN, attempts at harmonizing 
domestic policies or cross-border labor migration ran into government resistance, and the 
requirement of consensus gave each one of them a way to resist such attempts. In external 
terms, ASEAN has formed a system of engagement frameworks which allows ASEAN to 
project its power far beyond its membership. The first example is ASEAN Plus Three 
initiative, which started in the context of 1997 Asian Financial Crisis; it was institutionalizing 
cooperation with China, Japan and South Korea and resulted in creation of Chiang Mai 
Initiative for currency swaps. East Asia Summit, created in 2005, is a strategic dialogue 
forum at the highest level which brings together not only Plus Three countries but also the 
USA, Russia, India, Australia and New Zealand. Lastly, ASEAN Regional Forum which was 
created in 1994 continues to be the most important multilateral security forum in the region 
with more than twenty members. The Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership 
Agreement, which was signed in 2020 and is in operation since 2022, brings together 
ASEAN countries along with China, Japan, South Korea, Australia and New Zealand. The 
RCEP is the largest free trade agreement in the world in terms of population coverage. The 
rules of origin that have been harmonized form the most economically important aspect of 
the RCEP, simplifying regional supply chain immensely by making all the inputs from any 
country in the agreement qualify as originating inputs. Alongside these initiatives, there has 
been the Master Plan on ASEAN Connectivity and the Initiative for ASEAN Integration. 
The Forward Agenda: Vision 2045, DEFA, and Current Priorities 

The most notable futuristic document is ASEAN 2045: Our Shared Future, which was 
adopted via the Kuala Lumpur Declaration at the 46th ASEAN Summit held in May 2025. 
This document is based on the previous ASEAN 2025: Forging Ahead Together, which 
provides strategic guidelines for a period of twenty years in order to achieve a vision of 
making ASEAN Community a resilient, innovative, dynamic and people centric entity by 
2045 and making the region as the centre of development in the Indo-Pacific region. The 
document is complemented by four strategic plans in the areas of political security, economic, 
socio-cultural and connectivity. The document has a number of concrete steps, such as 
increasing use of local currency for cross-border transactions, enhancing disaster risk finance, 
addressing the issue of environmental degradation, and Initiative for ASEAN Integration 
Work Plan V (2026-2030). The ASEAN Digital Economy Framework Agreement (DEFA) 
represents the first ASEAN framework agreement on the digital economy and the most 
significant ASEAN digital economy initiative ever. The negotiations were finalized at the 
Senior Economic Officials Meeting in Manila in May 2026 and the agreement is set to be 
signed at the 49th ASEAN Summit in November 2026. DEFA sets out common rules on 
digital trade, cross-border e-commerce, data flows, digital payments and electronic 
transactions, consumer protection and cybersecurity. Moreover, the agreement will cover 
emerging issues such as artificial intelligence and source code protection. According to the 
studies cited by the ASEAN officials, successful implementation of the agreement would 
mean doubling the ASEAN digital economy to USD 2 trillion by 2030, while under the 
existing circumstances it would be only USD 1 trillion by 2030. This projection needs to be 
taken with some caution since it is contingent on the successful implementation of the 
agreement. Given ASEAN’s track record on the AEC’s services and non-tariff commitments, 
the key point remains the difference between signature and implementation. The Philippines 
has taken over the ASEAN Chairmanship on 1 January 2026 with the theme Navigating Our 
Future, Together, with three main focuses: Peace and Security Anchors, Prosperity Corridors, 
and People Empowerment. Among the listed aims of the Philippine agenda are the conclusion 
of the Code of Conduct in the South China Sea that would have the force of international law, 
the improvement of the chain supplies of semiconductors and critical minerals, the 
development of MSMEs and creative industries, and the issue of the responsible use of 
artificial intelligence. This year also marks the fiftieth anniversary of the signing of the Treaty 

of Amity and Cooperation. Another important agenda that runs alongside with the 
chairmanship one is the agenda of the integration of Timor-Leste into ASEAN economic 
instruments and institutions. It is the smallest and least developed member of the bloc with an 
economy that depends heavily on oil and gas incomes. 
The 'ASEAN Way': Assessment and Structural Limitations 
The unique process followed by the organization is often termed the ASEAN Way. It 
comprises a series of features that include decision-making through consensus, non-
interference in the internal affairs of member states, inclination toward informal consultations 
rather than formal ones, quiet diplomacy rather than conflict in the open, and the non-use of 
force in resolving disputes. The ASEAN Way needs to be evaluated and not blindly criticized 
or glorified. The accomplishment of the way is indeed impressive as it has managed to keep a 
very diverse array of countries, politically, religiously, linguistically and economically 
different, within the same tent for almost six decades without any war among the members 
since 1967. Costs, however, are inherent in the system, and stem from the same design. 
Five persistent weaknesses deserve to be listed here explicitly: 
• Consensus paralysis. As a result of requiring unanimity, each member has the power to veto 
the 
whole process, so collective action takes place at the speed of the least willing member. 
This has frequently led to inability to present a common position on controversial matters. 
• The South China Sea. More than a decade of negotiations towards reaching a binding Code 
of 
Conduct with China has not produced any results so far, partly due to different interest of 
the members depending on their involvement in the conflict and economic dependence on 
Beijing. 
• Myanmar crisis. ASEAN's response has been severely limited by the non-interference 
principle, highlighting the limitations of diplomatic efforts, when the concerned member state 
is not interested in cooperating. 
• Implementation gap. Compared to actual results, ASEAN generates a lot of declarations, 
blueprints and frameworks, yet there is no mechanism of implementation or any sanctions 

enforcing compliance. 
Development disparities. The wealth discrepancy between Singapore and other members 
including Myanmar, Lao PDR, Cambodia and Timor-Leste make integration a tough process 
because the same obligations have disparate impacts on members. These are not independent 
problems that could be solved without affecting the ASEAN Way. Consensus and non-
interference were exactly the factors which facilitated the collaboration among these eleven 
nations and also hindered their taking action when it matters most. ASEAN has always 
valued unity over strength, and the above criticisms were the cost of that strategy instead of a 
mistake. 
Conclusion 
ASEAN has developed from a loose political coalition against communism among five 
countries in 1967 into a regional bloc of eleven nations that has considerable economic clout 
and is integral to the Indo-Pacific framework. These accomplishments are tangible, consisting 
of close to six decades of no armed hostilities among member nations, virtually zero tariffs 
within the region, a series of trade deals including the RCEP, and a proven ability to attract 
the attention of major outside players. These limits are born out of the same institutional 
sources as its strengths, and this is the core insight in this report. It is the very same principles 
of consensus and non-interference which made it possible for eleven very different states to 
come together in the first place that stand in the way of any form of concrete action when it 
comes to South China Sea, Myanmar, and economic integration in general. In the years to 
come, the sustainability of this arrangement will be put to the test. Vision 2045 and DEFA are 
bold and ambitious undertakings, but it will be the integration of Timor-Leste into the bloc 
that will truly show if the group can overcome its internal disparities. The case of ASEAN 
provides an interesting contrast for students of international economics to the European 
model because it shows how regional integration can be achieved without sacrificing 
sovereignty and also shows very clearly how costly that approach is. 
References 

• ASEAN Secretariat, ASEAN Main Portal — asean.org (Bangkok Declaration, ASEAN 
Charter, ofﬁcial
summit documentation)
• ASEAN Secretariat, Kuala Lumpur Declaration on ASEAN 2045: Our Shared Future, 46th 
ASEAN
Summit, May 2025
• ASEAN Secretariat, Forging a New Era: Timor-Leste Admitted into ASEAN, October 2025
• ASEAN Secretariat, Statement of the Chairperson of the ASEAN Senior Economic Ofﬁcials 
(SEOM) on
the Conclusion of ASEAN DEF A Negotiations, May 2026
• ASEAN Secretariat, Chair's Statement of the 48th ASEAN Summit, Cebu, May 2026
• Government of the Philippines, ASEAN Philippines 2026 — asean2026.gov.ph 
(chairmanship theme and
priorities)
• World Economic Forum, "ASEAN takes major step toward landmark digital economy 
pact," October 2025
• The Diplomat, "'History Is Made': Timor-Leste Becomes ASEAN's 11th Member," October 
2025
• The Globalist, "Southeast Asia as a Powerhouse," April 2026 (regional economic and 
demographic
indicators)
• Course instructor, International Economics course materials, university course pack